Learning Rust by Building a CLI Greeting Tool using Ai prompts

1. Title & Objective
Title:
 Prompt-Powered Kickstart: Learning Rust by Building a CLI Greeting Tool
Chosen Technology:
 Rust (Systems Programming Language)
Why I Chose It:
 I chose Rust because it is a modern, high-performance systems language with strong guarantees around memory safety. Rust is widely used for building command-line tools, making it a perfect fit for a beginner-friendly CLI project. Choosing Rust also satisfied the requirement to use a language outside of Python, Java, and JavaScript.
End Goal:
 The goal of this project is to build a simple command-line application that accepts a user’s name as an argument and prints a personalized greeting.

2. Quick Summary of the Technology
What is it?
 Rust is a statically typed, compiled programming language focused on safety, speed, and concurrency. It prevents common bugs such as null pointer dereferencing and data races at compile time.
Where is it used?
Command-line tools (e.g., ripgrep)


Backend services


WebAssembly applications


Operating system components


One Real-World Example:
 The ripgrep search tool, used by developers for fast text searching, is written in Rust.

3. System Requirements
Requirement
Details
Command to Verify
Operating System
Linux / macOS / Windows
N/A
Language
Rust (2021 edition)
rustc --version
Build Tool
Cargo
cargo --version
Editor
VS Code or any text editor
N/A


4. Minimal Working Example
Functionality:
 The CLI reads a name from the command line and prints a greeting. Use any name that you wish
Command:
cargo run Daniel

Expected Output:
Hello, Daniel 👋
Welcome to my first rust application that I made using Ai.
Thank you for visiting the site!


5. AI Prompts Used (Learning Reflections)
Prompt Used
Purpose & Strategy
Learning Outcome
“Explain Rust in simple terms for a beginner coming from Python.”
Conceptual grounding
Helped me understand ownership, borrowing, and why Rust is memory-safe.
“Show me how to build a simple Rust CLI app that reads command-line arguments.”
Scaffolding
Provided the foundation using std::env::args() and a runnable example.
“Why am I getting command not found: cargo?”
Debugging environment issues
Identified missing Rust installation and introduced rustup.
“How do I fix could not find Cargo.toml?”
Build troubleshooting
Explained Cargo’s strict file naming and case sensitivity.
“Explain what Cargo.toml is used for in Rust.”
Tooling understanding
Clarified Cargo.toml’s role in dependency and project management.
“Why is my manifest missing a [package] section?”
Error resolution
Helped restore a broken Cargo.toml file so the project could compile.


6. Common Issues & Fixes
Issue
Error
Resolution
Rust not installed
command not found: rustc
Installed Rust using rustup.
Cargo not detected
command not found: cargo
Loaded environment using source ~/.cargo/env.
Missing Cargo.toml
could not find Cargo.toml
Renamed cargo.toml to Cargo.toml.
Invalid manifest
missing [package]
Restored required Cargo.toml structure.


7. References
Rust Official Documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org


The Rust Book: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book


Cargo Guide: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo


Moringa AI Platform: https://ai.moringaschool.com